DBM Beta Docs (#9457)
DataDog/integrations-core: mysql/README.md

## Overview

The Datadog Agent can collect a variety of telemetry from MySQL databases, including (but not limited to):

- Query throughput
- Query performance (e.g. average query run time, slow queries, etc.)
- Connections (e.g. currently open connections, aborted connections, errors, etc.)
- InnoDB (e.g. buffer pool metrics, etc.)
- Query Samples & Execution Plans (with [Deep Database Monitoring](#deep-database-monitoring))

You can also create your own metrics using custom SQL queries.

**Note:** This integration is also compatible with [MariaDB][2], as it serves as a ["drop-in replacement"][3] for MySQL.

## Setup

### Agent Installation

The MySQL check is included in the [Datadog Agent][4] package. No additional installation is needed on your MySQL server.

> ### Database Configuration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Database configuration
```

> #### Performance Schema

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Performance schema
```

In order to collect query metrics, samples, and execution plans for [Deep Database Monitoring](#deep-database-monitoring), the [MySQL Performance Schema](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/performance-schema-quick-start.html) needs to be enabled. 

<!-- xxx tabs xxx -->
<!-- xxx tab "Self-hosted" xxx -->

> Configure the following [Performance Schema Options](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/performance-schema-options.html). They can be configured on the command-line or in option files (i.e. `mysql.conf`). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Configure the following [Performance Schema Options](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/performance-schema-options.html). They can be configured on the command-line or in option files (for example,`mysql.conf`). 
```

| Parameter | Value | Description |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `performance_schema` | `ON` |  |
| `performance-schema-consumer-events-statements-current` | `ON` |  |
| `performance-schema-consumer-events-statements-history` | `ON` |  |
| `performance-schema-consumer-events-statements-history-long` | `ON` |  |
| `performance_schema_max_digest_length` | `4096` |  |
| `performance_schema_max_sql_text_length` | `4096` |  |

<!-- xxz tab xxx -->
<!-- xxx tab "Amazon RDS MySQL" xxx -->

Configure the following in the [DB Parameter Group](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonRDS/latest/UserGuide/USER_WorkingWithParamGroups.html):

| Parameter | Value | Description |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `performance_schema` | `1` |  |
| `performance_schema_max_digest_length` | `4096` |  |
| `performance_schema_max_sql_text_length` | `4096` |  |

> Note that for RDS MySQL there is no way to configure the `events_statements_*` consumers in the [DB Parameter Group](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonRDS/latest/UserGuide/USER_WorkingWithParamGroups.html) so they must enabled dynamically at runtime. See [Agent Database Access](#agent-database-access) for instructions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Note**: For RDS MySQL, there is no way to configure the `events_statements_*` consumers in the [DB Parameter Group](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonRDS/latest/UserGuide/USER_WorkingWithParamGroups.html) so they must enabled dynamically at runtime. See [Agent Database Access](#agent-database-access) for instructions.
```

<!-- xxz tab xxx -->
<!-- xxx tab "Amazon RDS Aurora MySQL" xxx -->

Configure the following in the [DB Parameter Group](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonRDS/latest/AuroraUserGuide/USER_WorkingWithParamGroups.html):

| Parameter | Value | Description |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `performance_schema` | `1` |  |
| `performance_schema_consumer_events_statements_current` | `ON` |  |
| `performance_schema_consumer_events_statements_history` | `ON` |  |
| `performance_schema_consumer_events_statements_history_long` | `ON` |  |
| `performance_schema_max_digest_length` | `4096` |  |
| `performance_schema_max_sql_text_length` | `4096` |  |

<!-- xxz tab xxx -->
<!-- xxz tabs xxx -->

### Agent Database Access

> The datadog agent requires read-only access to the database in order to collect statistics and queries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Datadog Agent requires read-only access to the database in order to collect statistics and queries.
```

<!-- xxx tabs xxx -->
<!-- xxx tab "MySQL ≤ 5.7" xxx -->

> For managed databases replace `localhost` with the host where your agent will be running, or `%` to allow the agent to connect from any host. For more information, see the [MySQL documentation][5].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For managed databases, replace `localhost` with the host where your agent will be running, or `%` to allow the agent to connect from any host. For more information, see the [MySQL documentation][5].
```

```SQL
CREATE USER 'datadog'@'localhost' IDENTIFIED BY '<UNIQUEPASSWORD>';
GRANT REPLICATION CLIENT ON *.* TO 'datadog'@'localhost' WITH MAX_USER_CONNECTIONS 5;
GRANT PROCESS ON *.* TO 'datadog'@'localhost';
GRANT SELECT ON performance_schema.* TO 'datadog'@'localhost'
```

<!-- xxz tab xxx -->
<!-- xxx tab "MySQL ≥ 8.0" xxx -->

> For managed databases replace `localhost` with the host where your agent will be running, or `%` to allow the agent to connect from any host. For more information, see the [MySQL documentation][5]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For managed databases, replace `localhost` with the host where your agent will be running, or `%` to allow the agent to connect from any host. For more information, see the [MySQL documentation][5]. 
```

| `performance_schema_consumer_events_statements_history_long` | `ON` | Optional. Enables tracking of a larger number of recent queries across all threads. If enabled it increases the likelihood of capturing execution details from infrequent queries. |
| `max_digest_length` | `4096` | Required for collection of larger queries. Increases the size of SQL digest text in `events_statements_*` tables. If left at the default value then queries longer than `1024` characters will not be collected. |
| `performance_schema_max_digest_length` | `4096` | Required for the same reason as `max_digest_length`. Needs to match `max_digest_length`. |
| `performance_schema_max_sql_text_length` | `4096` | Required for the same reason as `max_digest_length`. Needs to match `max_digest_length`. |

<!-- xxz tab xxx -->
<!-- xxz tabs xxx -->

### Agent Database Access

The Datadog Agent requires read-only access to the database in order to collect statistics and queries.

<!-- xxx tabs xxx -->

> <!-- xxx tab "MySQL ≤ 5.7" xxx -->

Author: Updated

> <!-- xxx tab "MySQL ≤ 5.7" xxx -->

Author: Updated

> For managed databases, replace `localhost` in every occurrence of `'datadog'@'localhost'` with the host where your agent will be running, or put `%` to allow the agent to connect from any host. For more information, see the [MySQL documentation][5].

Author: Agreed, will update

> For managed databases, replace `localhost` in every occurrence of `'datadog'@'localhost'` with the host where your agent will be running, or put `%` to allow the agent to connect from any host. For more information, see the [MySQL documentation][5].

Author: As I started writing this it turned out to be too messy. It'll have to be a nested tab within the first tab then another tab navigation below. 

I updated to default to `%` as that will be a fine default for all users, then whoever needs to further restrict the user hostname can do so themselves. I think that's fine.

```

<!-- xxz tab xxx -->
<!-- xxz tabs xxx -->

Create the functions to enable collection of statements & execution plans. This is required only for [Deep Database Monitoring](#deep-database-monitoring).

```SQL
CREATE SCHEMA datadog;
GRANT CREATE TEMPORARY TABLES ON `datadog`.* TO 'datadog'@'localhost';

DELIMITER $$
CREATE PROCEDURE datadog.explain_statement(IN query TEXT)
    SQL SECURITY DEFINER
BEGIN
    SET @explain := CONCAT('EXPLAIN FORMAT=json ', query);
    PREPARE stmt FROM @explain;
    EXECUTE stmt;
    DEALLOCATE PREPARE stmt;
END $$

-- (Optional) Gives the agent the ability to enable performance schema events_statements consumers on databases where they can't be enabled permanently in the configuration (like RDS Aurora)
CREATE PROCEDURE datadog.enable_events_statements_consumers()
    SQL SECURITY DEFINER
BEGIN
    UPDATE performance_schema.setup_consumers SET enabled='YES' WHERE name LIKE 'events_statements_%';
END $$

DELIMITER ;

GRANT EXECUTE ON PROCEDURE datadog.explain_statement TO 'datadog'@'localhost';
GRANT EXECUTE ON PROCEDURE datadog.enable_events_statements_consumers TO 'datadog'@'localhost';

> ```

Reviewer 2: I believe this one should be a separate SQL block with paragraph text around it.

Author: Agreed, will update

| <code style="word-break:break-all;">`performance_schema_max_digest_length`</code> | `4096` | Must match `max_digest_length`. |
| <code style="word-break:break-all;">`performance_schema_max_sql_text_length`</code> | `4096` | Must match `max_digest_length`. |

<!-- xxz tab xxx -->
<!-- xxz tabs xxx -->

### Agent Database Access

The Datadog Agent requires read-only access to the database in order to collect statistics and queries.

The following instructions grant the agent permission to login from any host using `datadog@'%'`. This is required for managed databases like `Amazon RDS` or `Google CloudSQL` as it's not possible to install the datadog agent directly on the host. For self-hosted databases the datadog user can be restricted to be allowed to login only from localhost by using `datadog@'localhost'`. See the [MySQL documentation][5] for more info.

<!-- xxx tabs xxx -->
<!-- xxx tab "MySQL ≥ 8.0" xxx -->

```SQL
CREATE USER datadog@'%' IDENTIFIED WITH mysql_native_password by '<UNIQUEPASSWORD>';
ALTER USER datadog@'%' WITH MAX_USER_CONNECTIONS 5;

> GRANT REPLICATION CLIENT ON *.* TO datadog@'%'

Reviewer 3: Missing a semicolon at the end: `GRANT REPLICATION CLIENT ON *.* TO datadog@'%';`

Author: Fixed

GRANT PROCESS ON *.* TO datadog@'%';
GRANT SELECT ON performance_schema.* TO datadog@'%';
```

<!-- xxz tab xxx -->
<!-- xxx tab "MySQL 5.6 & 5.7" xxx -->

```SQL
CREATE USER datadog@'%' IDENTIFIED BY '<UNIQUEPASSWORD>';
GRANT REPLICATION CLIENT ON *.* TO datadog@'%' WITH MAX_USER_CONNECTIONS 5;
GRANT PROCESS ON *.* TO datadog@'%';
GRANT SELECT ON performance_schema.* TO datadog@'%';
```

<!-- xxz tab xxx -->
<!-- xxz tabs xxx -->

The following schema and procedures are required for [Deep Database Monitoring](#deep-database-monitoring).

```SQL
CREATE SCHEMA IF NOT EXISTS datadog;

> GRANT EXECUTE ON datadog.* to datadog@'%'

Reviewer 3: Missing semicolon at the end: `GRANT EXECUTE ON datadog.* to datadog@'%';`

Author: Fixed

> GRANT CREATE TEMPORARY TABLES ON `datadog`.* TO datadog@'%';

Reviewer 3: I believe this is from the previous iteration of docs, but this `datadog` has back ticks around it while others don't.

Author: Good catch, fixed
